In December of 2022, as we were emerging from the worst of the COVID-19
pandemic, I decided to embark on the adventure of learning and performing the
complete _Orgelbüchlein_ (“Little Organ Book”) of Johann Sebastian Bach over
the course of 2023. This project continued into 2024, and — after a successfull
[Indiegogo campain](https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/bradley-burgess-the-orgelbuchlein#/) —
culminated in recording the complete collection for RavenCD.

---

## Liner Notes

by Bradley Burgess

### About the Orgelbüchlein

The Orgelbüchlein (Little Organ Book) of Johann Sebastian Bach (1685–1750) is a
collection of 46 chorale preludes,[^1] long regarded as a pillar of organ
literature. While the title page seems to indicate a decidedly pedagogical
motivation for the collection, there is plausible evidence that the title page
was written after most of the music was composed.[^2] It is very likely that
Bach—­ever the pragmatist—composed the collection to fulfill both a didactic
and a practical need: a Lutheran church musician, he probably used these pieces
in his own service playing, as hymn introductions, interludes, or even
accompaniments.[^3] Bach put only 46 pieces to paper, however we know that he had
originally intended to set a total of 164 hymns: most of the manuscript
consists of pages with chorale titles at the top, but that otherwise are blank.
The hymns chosen fall into two broad categories: (1) de tempore (“of the
time”), hymns belonging to a particular season of the church year (Advent
through Pentecost), and (2) omne tempore (“all times”), more general hymns.

The Orgelbüchlein is sometimes overshadowed by Bach’s two bigger chorale
collections: the Great Eighteen or Leipzig Chorales, and _Clavier-Übung III_.
This is a pity, for within the pages of the Orgel­büchlein live forty-five[^4]
unique and fully formed, rich musical worlds. The level of musical conciseness
Bach achieves is extraordinary: a complete musico-theological statement is
made often within the span of ten to fifteen measures — sometimes fewer than
ten (e.g. BWV 602). It is easy to imagine that Schubert might have drawn
inspiration from The Orgelbüchlein while penning some of his Lieder, which are
similarly brief and also employ vivid text painting at times. Alan Walker, the
great biographer of Liszt, noted that, “If [Liszt] had composed nothing else,
he would have to be regarded as a major composer on the strength of [the Piano
Sonata] alone.”[^5] It is my belief that the same could be said of Bach and the
Orgelbüchlein.

A handful of the chorales in the present collection have enjoyed great
popularity and are played often — rightly so. These include In dir ist Freude,
In dulci jubilo, Ich ruf zu dir and O Mensch bewein. However, these pieces do
not represent musically exemplary outliers in an otherwise mediocre collection;
each of the 46 are masterpieces, with Bach’s compositional prowess on full
display to those who take the time to notice. He is sometimes kind enough to
inform the performer when he is crafting a canon by indicating so in the title,
but it is not always apparent to the casual listener what contrapuntal sorcery
Bach is able to perform; the intellectual achievements are never won at the
expense of the music. Simply stated, these 46 pieces are nothing short of
genius.

### About the Recording

In recording the complete collection, three decisions were made in relation to
the score:

1. I did not record the less-than-two-measure frag­ment of O Traurigkeit.
2. While the Neue Bach-Ausgabe includes a repeat at the end of Puer natus in Bethlehem, I chose to omit the repeat. Because of the cramped nature of the surviving manuscript, it is not clear how Bach intended this chorale to end, and no other work in the collection includes a wholesale repeat of the entire chorale.
3. Instead of choosing a single version of Liebster Jesu (BWV 633 & 634), a path taken by many who have recorded the complete collection, I opted to create a hybrid version, using BWV 633 for the first statement of each line of the tune, and BWV 634 as a varied repeat. This is made clear in the two contrasting registrations used. The decision was motivated by a desire to hear both (albeit very similar) versions of the chorale, while not including two separate tracks of essentially the same piece.

I played my first Orgelbüchlein chorale in 2012, and over the next decade I
learned a handful of others. As someone who came to serious study of the organ
later than most—after having already completed graduate work in piano
performance—I didn’t have the opportunity to study a lot of these pieces during
my formative years. Additionally, many of the chorale tunes upon which these
pieces are based are seldom, if ever, sung in present-day English-speaking
churches; there is therefore less immediately obvious practical use for some of
these pieces.

Like everything else, church music was completely disrupted by the COVID-19
pandemic. It took its toll on all of us. As we began to emerge from the
pandemic, many had lost a measure of the motivation and inspiration they once
felt. In late December of 2022, I decided to take on a project to reignite my
creativity and provide a framework for learning some new music. My thoughts
returned to the Orgelbüchlein: it was the perfect candidate for a big but
manageable project. I loosely resolved to learn the complete set over the
course of the next year, and use many of the pieces as voluntaries in my work
as a church organist.

I didn’t manage to complete the project in 2023 as planned, but the
Orgelbüchlein bug had bitten, and I knew I had to see the project through to
completion. I hadn’t expected to become quite so taken with these “little”
pieces, but the more time I spent with them, the more my appreciation and
admiration for the music grew. I had favorites at first, but by the end I came
to love each of them — and, as it turns out, some of the chorales I put off
learning initially have become favorites themselves. In truth, my favorite is
whichever one I’m currently playing. This recording represents the culmination
of a journey begun more than a decade ago when I first learned Nun komm, der
Heiden Heiland as an Advent voluntary, a journey that has occupied a good deal
of my energy over the course of the past two years.

[^1]: organ works based on Lutheran hymn tunes

[^2]: Russell Stinson, Bach: The Orgelbüchlein (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 31.

[^3]: Stinson, 27. See tinyurl.com/ob-lecture for a demonstration of the chorales as accompaniments.

[^4]: While there are indeed 46 pieces in the collection, Bach included two very similar settings of Liebster Jesu; these are essentially two versions of the same piece.

[^5]: Alan Walker, Reflections on Liszt (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2005), 129.

### About The Organ

Fritts Op. 43 of 43 ranks was installed at St. Thomas Episcopal Church, Terrace
Park, Ohio, in the early fall of 2023, replacing the 28-rank Wicks Op. 4573 of 1969. Paul Fritts & Co. was chosen by the organ committee to construct the new
instrument, owing to the committee’s recognition of the meticulous detail and
supreme excellence of Fritts’ work, as well as the desire to secure an
instrument that would last for generations.

The case design is modeled after 17th-century North German organs — especially
instruments built by Arp Schnitger (1648–1719), widely considered a very
influential organ builder of his day and still. The design closely follows the
proportions of the “Wide Hamburg” style, which is mostly associated with
Schnitger. The case is constructed with fumed white oak and finished with oil
to further enhance the color and protect the wood. The pipes of the Pedal
division flank the organ, with the Great division directly above the impost and
the enclosed Swell division above the Great.

The interior of the organ is designed to maximize access for tuning and
maintenance. The wind is provided by an electric blower that feeds two wedge
bellows, supplying constant, regulated wind pressure to the organ. The blower
and bellows are housed in the basement of the chancel, directly beneath the
organ.

With the exception of the Pedal Subbaß and Bourdon and a few notes of the Swell
Gedackt, which are made of wood, the pipes are made of metal, cast on a bed of
sand. Casting on sand allows the metal to cool about fifteen times faster than
other casting methods, which results in a finer, more stable crystalline
structure that has great tonal benefits. The pipes are made of an alloy
appropriate for the desired tonal quality of each voice: the façade principals
and the reeds are made of a tin-rich alloy, while the flutes are lead-rich.

The organ employs suspended key action, offering a sensitive and direct
connection to the instrument. Some mechanical action organ builders, including
Fritts, have embraced the use of carbon fiber over wood for the construction of
trackers, as this material is not susceptible to changes in temperature and
humidity. While many organ builders utilize electric stop action for their
instruments, Fritts opts for a mechanical stop action, with the combination
action being made possible by placing magnetic solenoids in the action run. The
organ is equip­ped with one thousand memory levels, 14 general pistons, seven
manual divisional pistons and two pedal divisional pistons—and with toe studs
for coupler reversibles and sequencer stepping. Incorporating the solenoids in
the action run allows the organ to be playable even with a failure in the
electrical components. Only the blower, the combination action, and the
interior lighting (for maintenance) are electrically powered.

Construction of this magnificent instrument required approximately 18,000 man
hours from the nine expert craftsmen at the Paul Fritts & Co. workshop.

The organ’s inauguration and blessing on November 19, 2023 included an Evensong
sung by the St. Thomas Parish Choir with a recital following the service
performed by Dr. Jason M. Gunnell, Associate Director of Music & Organist.

A [complete
stoplist](http://www.frittsorgan.com/opus_pages/galleries/opus_43/specification.html)
can be found on the Fritts website.
